Doc update (#101)
Flow-Launcher/docs: plugin-dev.md

| **Executable** (any language) | JSON-RPC (subprocess) | Faster than scripted languages | Core API | Go, Rust, compiled TypeScript, or any binary |

**Not sure?** Use this decision guide:

- You know C# or F# → **C# / F#** (most powerful, full API access)
- You want the fastest path to a working plugin → **Python** (simplest JSON-RPC setup, good library ecosystem)
- Your plugin makes a lot of web API calls → **JavaScript / TypeScript** (async-native, fetch built-in)
- You want minimal startup time and no runtime dependency → **Executable** (ship a single binary)

---

## The plugin.json file

Every plugin, regardless of language, requires a `plugin.json` file in its root directory. This is how Flow discovers and identifies your plugin.

```json
{
  "ID": "a unique GUID, e.g. 2f4e384e-76ce-45c3-aea2-b16f5e5c328f",
  "ActionKeyword": "kw",
  "Name": "My Plugin",
  "Description": "What it does, briefly",
  "Author": "Your Name",
  "Version": "1.0.0",
  "Language": "python",
  "Website": "https://github.com/you/your-plugin",
  "IcoPath": "Images/icon.png",
  "ExecuteFileName": "main.py"
}

> ```
> 
> See the [plugin.json reference](plugin.json.md) for all available fields.
> 
> ---
> 
> ## What a result looks like
> 
> Whether you're writing C#, Python, or JavaScript, you return the same conceptual structure:
> 
> ```json
> {
>   "Title": "Main text shown in the result",
>   "SubTitle": "Secondary line below the title",
>   "IcoPath": "Images/icon.png",
>   "Score": 50,
>   "JsonRPCAction": {
>     "method": "openUrl",
>     "parameters": ["https://example.com"]
>   }
> }
> ```
> 
> - **Title / SubTitle** — what the user sees
> - **IcoPath** — path to an icon (relative to your plugin folder)
> - **Score** — influences result ordering (higher = ranked higher)
> - **JsonRPCAction** — what happens when the user selects this result
> 
> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What is a Result?

All plugins return a list of Result objects after a query.

Each Result represents one row in Flow Launcher and controls:
- How that row looks
- How the user can interact with it

It has many properties, but these are the core ones:

- **Title:** the first line of the result
- **SubTitle:** the second line of the result
- **IcoPath / Glyph:** the icon shown for the result
- **Score:** higher values rank earlier (also influenced by user selection history)
- **Action (.NET) / JsonRPCAction (JsonRPC):** what the result does when selected or clicked

The Action property varies by plugin type:

- **JsonRPC plugins (Python, Javascript, etc):**
  - JsonRPCAction is an object with a method name and parameter values.
  - Those values are serialized and sent back to your plugin over JSON-RPC.
- **.NET plugins (C#, F#):**
  - Action (or AsyncAction for async) is a callback delegate on the Result.
  - It executes inside the Flow Launcher process, with no serialization step.

For specific examples of how to use results, see the [development guide](#development-guides-by-language) for your chosen language.
---
```

- Run initialisation and cleanup logic on startup/shutdown

---

## How Flow calls your plugin

Every time the user types in the search bar, Flow calls your plugin's `query` method with the current search string. Your plugin returns results. Flow renders them.

```text
User types query
      │
      ▼
Flow Launcher
      │  calls query("search text")
      ▼
Your Plugin
      │  returns list of Results
      ▼
Flow Launcher renders results
      │
      ▼
User selects a result → Flow calls your action
```

For .NET plugins this is a direct in-process method call. For all other languages, this communication happens over **JSON-RPC** — a lightweight protocol where Flow sends JSON to your process's stdin, and your process writes JSON to stdout.

---

## Choosing a language

| Language | Integration | Performance | API access | Best for |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| **C# / F# (.NET)** | In-process | Fastest | Full | Anything. The most capable option. |
| **Python** | JSON-RPC (subprocess) | Good | Core API | Scripting, data tasks, rapid prototyping |
| **JavaScript / TypeScript** | JSON-RPC (Node.js) | Good | Core API | Web API calls, JS-native tooling |

> | **Executable** (any language) | JSON-RPC (subprocess) | Fastest for scripts | Core API | Go, Rust, compiled TypeScript, or any binary |

Reviewer: What does Fastest for scripts mean? Doesn't seem clear to me, when compared to C# just being Fastest

Author: updated

---

## The plugin.json file

Every plugin, regardless of language, requires a `plugin.json` file in its root directory. This is how Flow discovers and identifies your plugin.

```json
{
  "ID": "a unique GUID, e.g. 2f4e384e-76ce-45c3-aea2-b16f5e5c328f",
  "ActionKeyword": "kw",
  "Name": "My Plugin",
  "Description": "What it does, briefly",
  "Author": "Your Name",
  "Version": "1.0.0",
  "Language": "python",
  "Website": "https://github.com/you/your-plugin",
  "IcoPath": "Images/icon.png",
  "ExecuteFileName": "main.py"
}
```

See the [plugin.json reference](plugin.json.md) for all available fields.

---

## What a result looks like

Whether you're writing C#, Python, or JavaScript, you return the same conceptual structure:

```json
{
  "Title": "Main text shown in the result",
  "SubTitle": "Secondary line below the title",
  "IcoPath": "Images/icon.png",
  "Score": 50,
  "JsonRPCAction": {
    "method": "openUrl",
    "parameters": ["https://example.com"]
  }
}
```

- **Title / SubTitle** — what the user sees
- **IcoPath** — path to an icon (relative to your plugin folder)
- **Score** — influences result ordering (higher = ranked higher)

> - **JsonRPCAction** — what happens when the user selects this result

Reviewer: In C# its just Action instead of JsonRPCAction, and in general looks quite different
Perhaps we could add a note explaining at least that this is different in C#
Or just have a seperate section for it from the JsonRPC ones?

Author: @DavidGBrett can you suggest an edit here as I'm not a C# dev so not sure how to improve this?

Reviewer: In my suggestion there I avoid the JSON and just go with an list to be more high level and handle both .net and jsonrpc
And added an explanation for the difference between Action in them, too confusing?

I could write a separate one for .net but I thought that might be too long and detailed for this overview

Reviewer: Heres a matching example of a result in C# (F# looks different)

```C#
new Result
{
    Title = "Open example.com",
    SubTitle = "https://example.com",
    IcoPath = "Images/icon.png",
    Score = 50,
    Action = _ =>
    {
        // You can write the action code directly here
        _context.API.OpenUrl("https://example.com");
        return true; // Whether to hide Flow Launcher after this action
    }
};
```

---

## Plugin folder structure

All plugins share this general layout:

```text
MyPlugin/
├── plugin.json          ← required: plugin metadata
├── main.py              ← your entry point (language-dependent name)

> ├── SettingsTemplate.yaml  ← optional: defines settings shown in Flow's UI

Reviewer: Is this specific only to python? at least myself I've never seen or used a file like that working on C# plugins - runs the risk of people thinking they've missed something

Author: This example is Python specific so perhaps we need a structure per language or at least some general form to cover them all?

Reviewer: I think it really varies a lot between languages and in general the user has a lot of room to decide how they want to structure it
Even then pretty often they will just use a template and work from there

I think instead of listing a layout, we just should just mention the [dotnet template command](https://github.com/Flow-Launcher/dotnet-template) and [plugin samples](https://github.com/Flow-Launcher/plugin-samples) as starting points

We could mention also that we need that every plugin has a plugin.json that points to the plugin's entrypoint file (ExecuteFileName) (in c# this is the compilled dll) and the plugins icon image (IcoPath)
- without specifying the structure of where these are located

If we want to specify structure we can do that in the specific development guides but I think we should phrase it more as examples than requirements
Things like SettingsTemplate can be mentioned in the specific development guides too

├── Images/
│   └── icon.png         ← plugin icon
└── lib/                 ← optional: bundled dependencies
```

---

## Development guides by language

Pick your language and follow the step-by-step guide:

### .NET (C# or F#)
- [Develop a .NET plugin](develop-dotnet-plugins.md)

### Python
- [1. Set up your project](py-setup-project.md)

> - [2. Write your plugin code](py-write-code.md)

Reviewer: Do we need to list all the steps here as individual links?
It feels unnecessarily verbose and is another thing to maintain
Can we have a link per language/type?

Author: Combined all language sub files into a master file.
